I've scrupulously been keeping this off the main blog, because I'm convinced that no one who reads my usual output gives a shit. Consequently, I doubt this post will ever make it out of `drafts/`, but I'm still writing it.

## Diet

Lately[^as-in], I've been working out a fuck-ton more than usual. And watching my diet. Mostly with an aim for better nutritional input, with a minor focus on eliminating some of my digestive issues. Its incidentally been pushing me further and further towards a vegan diet. I still occasionally have sushi, and no one is taking the honey out of my tea[^although-to-be-fair] any time soon, but I've otherwise had no animal or animal byproducts. And the past week in particular has been free even of those transgressions.

[^as-in]: As in "for the past half-year or so", rather than just the usual week-long burst of activity.
[^although-to-be-fair]: Although, to be fair, I've also been having steadily less tea as time goes on. So there's also that.

I still don't think I consider myself vegan, and wouldn't even if it weren't for the noted exceptions. As far as I'm concerned, I'm still a social omnivore; the rigorous diet is just what I do while I'm paying attention and on my own. The transition sort of snuck up on me. Having thought a bit about Pollan's view, and the state of North American nutrition in general, I've been determined to use meat as more of a spice than a main course. And I've been trying to get most of my carbs through rice rather than bread. And then I found out I'm moderately lactose intolerant[^moderately-because]. And _then_ I found out that I'm mildly allergic to eggs. So, I mean, I can't eat butter, can't drink milk, can't eat eggs, and I eat as little meat as possible.

[^moderately-because]: "Moderately" because it absolutely won't kill me to eat any quantity of cheese, but it just as absolutely _will_ make me feel bloated and give me various other short-term gastro-intestinal problems. This is something I'd prefer to avoid if I at all can. By the way, before you suggest it, [Lactease](TODO) and similar products do little if anything for me. I have lactose-intolerant friends and family that swear by them, so they may still work for _you_, but I haven't had enough payoff to actually recommend them to you myself.

It was a predictably small step from that to just plain cutting out meat, and starting to get my protein from [various](TODO - red kidney), [readily](TODO - white kidney) and [cheaply](TODO - black bean) available [legumes](TODO - lentils). It absolutely helps that my primary is also vegan, so we don't have to pull any kind of culinary contortionism to hit both diets.

I'm not sure which had a larger effect on my weight; the diet or the workout, but in combination, they absolutely help. I went from an obviously flabby 110 kg to a somewhat-muscular-but-still-kinda-flabby 86 kg. This also resulted in taking about two inches off my waist-line, and shrinking me to the point that previously tight shirts are now noticeably baggy around my mid-section. I'm very probably going to have to buy more clothes soon, but holding off because I'm convinced I can lose another five kilos or so, and put on enough muscle-mass that fit will become an issue again before I'm done.

## Exercise

The "lifting" is admittedly a bit misleading. I've been doing some intense cardio, and some much more intense calisthetics[TODO - spelling?]/weights. In particular, a point of pride is that I can now do an actual pull-up. And, as soon as my elbow heals, I'll start on an upper-body regiment that includes weighed pull-ups. Injuries have been non-trivial, by the way. I've _always_ had problems with my left knee. Nothing serious, and nothing that prevents me from running the occasional 5k if I want to, but I can not for the life of me do a full three sets of [lunges](TODO). Since I started the latest burst of exercise, my left elbow has developed a similar affliction. Again, nothing _too_ serious, the stabbing pains are done at this point, but I still occasionally get some ache after lifting a child, or doing a short farmers-walk-equivalent with the weekly groceries. I'm convinced that this is a result of a [set of forearm-isolation exercises](TODO) I was doing in an effort to improve my grip for [bouldering](TODO) purposes. In hindsight, I can't say I'd recommend it. For my part, as I said, I'm intending to go back to a general upper-body workout rather than isolating anything in particular. That's going to mean [pull-ups, chin-ups](TODO - how-to pull ups), [dips](TODO - how to dips), some [push](TODO - diamond push-ups)-up [variants](TODO - pec focus), and the occasional [blob deadlift](TODO - blob deadlift) when I feel particularly grippy.

So there, I guess. Just so my drafts folder knows; I now lift. And try to eat clean. Wish me luck in both endeavours.
