This is another piece that deals with stuff I'm convinced no one else actually cares about. So I'm keeping it in the drafts folder, rather than publishing it at [the usual place](http://langnostic.inaimathi.ca). If you successfully read this article and feel no smarter for it, you have only youself to blame.

## On Being Gaunt

A little while ago, I talked to my little sister who hasn't seen me in the flesh for a while. It's important to note that I mean "little" both in the sense that she's younger than me, _and_ in the sense that she usally weighs less. My body transformation quest finally started to feel real when she said something along the lines of "Dammit, I'm not used to being the fat sibling in this relationship". I don't mean to rub it in or anything, but it was on some level incredibly satisfying to hear that from someone.

My progress pics so far have already been posted, and they show my progression from ~240 pounds to ~160, and the differences in my anatomy are pretty stark. Mostly for the better, I have to admit. I have more energy and capability; in the sense that I don't get tired nearly as easily and I've been able to acccomplish [feats](TODO - yoga wheel pose) that I [couldn't](TODO - wind sprints) before. Doing pull-ups easily is also a thing. I still _remember_ being barely able to do one, and I'm currently at the point where my upper-body routine involves six sets of eight.

There are exactly two negatives[^and-arguably]. One is that chairs are suddenly less comfortable. My various pelvic bones are a lot closer to the surface of my body than they used to be, and that makes it almost painful to sit in un-padded chairs for extended periods of time. Good office chairs are still ok, but the days of spending ~45 minutes or so sitting and sketching on a park bench are over for me I think. The other, and this is freshly relevant to me, is that cold cuts me a lot harder than it used to. There's an old leather jacket I had that I used to be able to get through the winter with, without even donning a sweater. That's not the sort of thing I can pull off any more.

[^and-arguably]: And arguably one aesthetic point; my face looks gaunt enough that my mother-in-law has apparently commented to my wife about it in private. I'm not malnourished or anything, but my jaw and cheekbones are definitely visible as I type this. Personally, I don't mind it, but it's also not a point of pride or anything, so I'm chalking it up as neither win nor loss.

## On Dancing

Dancing is... It's pretty awesome. I'm really glad I finally discovered it, because it would have been extremely easy to go the rest of my life without doing so, and it feels very fulfilling in a way that few other physical activities have. It's the ultimate co-operative, real-time strategy game. And it demands a degree of skill, balance and body control that will push me to control a lot of other things I've never thought of as being _in_ my control.

I'm hoping to save my offspring from the potential fate of not discovering all of their passions, but I'm honestly not sure how to. My own parents pushed me pretty hard in the extra-curriculars area, and I always sort of grudgingly went along with it. And I suppose that was an understatement; there was nothing _merely_ grudging about my truculence. The point being that I'm honestly not sure I'd have had the same positive reaction to the activity had I been pushed into it earlier. Which means the absolute best I can hope for regarding the offspring situation is to keep a paternal eye on them, and gently steer them in subtle ways to seek out things that sound like they may be passions. I'm beginning to think that I'm nowhere near machiavellian enough to make a decent parent.

## On Contracting

Contracting is another awesome thing that no one seriously told me was an option. I'm back at a full-time gig for the moment, but honestly don't know how long I'll be able to tolerate this. It's beginning to feel pretty stupid to work for ~8 hours per day. 20 per week sounds just about reasonable enough, but that's typically not enough to secure a living wage for someone. Let alone a family of four. I'm happy to report that I've been managing pretty well, actually, but still need to figure out a way of outright retiring at some point relatively soon. Working is nice. Working toward someone else's goal is annoying but bearable[^assuming-theres]. Working toward someone else's goal to the detriment of mine is not a thing I can take any more.

[^assuming-theres]: Assuming there's sufficient payment and skill acquisition.

The line's pretty blurry is the real problem here. At some point, every employer that wants you on full-time is going to want you to do something stupid or boring or both for an extended period of time[^on-the-order-of]. It'll be an easily explained task, that makes sense in the service of the business as a whole, but it'll undeniably be a _chore_ that you won't like doing, and then you'll have a Decision to make. That's sort of where I am at the moment. I'm at a pre-A-round startup that looks fairly promising, and will eventually have very interesting work for me to start doing, _and_ will pay pretty well along the way. But. In the meantime, there's lots of persnickety little things to do in terms of front-end development and pager escalation and other horrifically boring things that I honestly wouldn't bother with if I had any choice in the matter. And there's a time demand here that ensures I won't be able to build up additional contracts or alternate income sources until I straight-up leave.

[^on-the-order-of]: On the order of weeks or months.

So, I mean, that's a tough call. Do I want to gamble that I can get good contract streams going elsewhere? Do I want to bet that this startup takes off? Do I want to get complacent by throwing this much of my time at a single large project that may or may not bear fruit in the long run? It's risky in all directions, and I can't lie to myself about that, but the ultimate question is what I want. And I think I want more time more than I want more money at the moment. This may be a short-sighted view, but I honestly can't see myself thriving on full-time jobs right now. I need to take a deep breath, metaphorically speaking, then start doing my own thing with zeal and vigor. The self-motivation piece seems like it's the hardest one to pull together, and I have that in spades[^admittedly-sometimes]

[^admittedly-sometimes]: Admittedly, not _all_ the time, but I think this is the probem I'd like to work on.
