It's general update time.

Still hacking Scheme obviously. It's getting to the point where the title of this blog may be inaccurate, because I'm very clearly biased towards a family of languages. Not religiously, mind you. I still do a fair bit of Python/Ruby/JS hacking, but these days, if I get to do whatever I want, I reach for Scheme. My Erlang use has petered off, but that'll probably change once the dieCast project hits full steam.

Tools-wise, not much new, just incremental changes. Emacs/GIT/conkeror is still my development environment of choice, and it hasn't fucked me over yet, so I'll keep it. The only change has been commenting out NXHTML mode (whose PHP support was pretty shit in any case). The hardest part is really when I go over to a friend's house and need to show them something on another browser. C-xf doesn't work in chrome, and C-s/C-r don't perform isearch outside of Emacs/conkeror. I need to start getting used to the "Hey, why don't you drive" attitude when it's someone elses' machine. I haven't considered learning other shortcuts, just in case you care; all of my computers run linux these days, and they all have my standards on them. I'll always have my netbook with me, and my desktop at home, so there's really no reason for me to try to further habituate the standard Windows/OS X hotkeys. It's kind of weird actually. Inside of four years, I've gone from a casual Windows user (convinced in the utter superiority of his own platform), to a reluctant OSX-piloting designer (stayeing the hell away from anything that didn't have shiny menus), to a Linux-using scheme hacker who spends most of his time in eshell. I gave my old Mac to my girlfriend, who seems to enjoy it more than I ever did, and the only contact I have with Windows these days is checking outlook at the office, and running Baldur's Gate 2 on [VirtualBox](http://www.virtualbox.org/) at home.

The transformation is complete.

The projects are going ok. slash is on ice for the time being, while I play around with [dieCast](http://diecastgames.blogspot.com/), which is now in internal beta state. Over the next week or two, I'll be getting some friends to try it out, and doing the last bit of code cleanup before we go live (no real polish, mind you, just fixing the crashing bugs and instituting one or two limits that I haven't needed to yet). That's not to say that I'm never coming back to the idea of compiling Scheme down to flash applets; just have other things I'd rather be doing right now. I'll get back to general game development in the near future.

Typing is confusing me slightly. I haven't been practicing rigorously lately, maybe once every three days or so, I'll put in 15 minutes. And yet, typing speed is going up; I'm now consistently in the high sixties (there seems to be a wall at 69.8 wpm which I want to break down on my way to the 100s), which is about 20wpm faster than back when I was starting out. It's weird because you'd think that regular typing wouldn't really improve you very much, especially if you're using 3 different keyboard layouts depending on where you are (I've got an [HH Lite2](http://www.fentek-ind.com/happyhacking.htm) at home, a [Microsoft Ergo](http://www.amazon.com/Microsoft-Natural-Ergo-Keyboard-4000/dp/B000A6PPOK) at the office and my default netbook keyboard on my netbook). Here we are though; I've actually improved more since I stopped practicing. It happens, I guess.
