Still no work on Slash (not that the three people who read this blog for some reason care). Though I have heard in the meantime that Flashplayer now supports mobile platforms, so Flash/Flex development just lost one crippling deformity. If I manage to whip up a Scheme-based flash editor/compiler, it will have lost another. It's starting to look better and better in terms of development, so I've really got to double down and get this show on the road. The best way may be to finish a quick compiler, then try to make some games/interfaces with it and see where deficiencies lie.

What I did do was start work at the new place. 

It's different. 

Actually, that's a filthy lie. It's the polar opposite of I Love Rewards; I feel as though I've stepped through the looking glass. It's a much smaller company for starters, without an established IT department (so it's up to me to promote good practice like source control, bug databases, testing environments, unified development environments, etc.). There's some downright odd things; mainly the adherence to Windows (though I did just come out of a fully formed IT crew where I was the odd duck for running Linux), a seemingly odd rejection of wi-fi, and a fanatic devotion to shredders (one per room, minimum). Not sure how to read that yet. The good parts are good; I more or less get to work on what I want, I'll be helping out more with both the tech side and the design side, and the hours are friggin' amazing. It seems like my pay will be better too (which I wasn't expecting, given that my salary was staying the same. I'm assuming this has to do with the non-monatery rewards being part of my TCP over at the old place). There's also a lot less emphasis on the glamour of things; this world is less about appearing cool than about actually doing cool things. They don't try to get PR out of things like a decent training program, or the possibility of doing what you love to a high degree of quality. They just let you, and say no more about it. It's as routine as getting paid. Which is good because there's no douchebag cracking the metaphorical whip so that he doesn't look bad in front of the media, but it also means someone eslse has to sing their praises. I'll give it a shot, for what that's worth.

I have a few things to do here. 

Firstly, I need to finish up that PHP app I started coding for them a few months ago. I expect this to take about a week. Two at the outside, given the amount that I've taken so far (about 48 hours total, but having a full-time job tends to spread out your auxillary work somewhat).

Second, I have a pretty burning need to get back onto Ubuntu on my desktop environment. A stopgap is using my awesome new netbook with a spare monitor, but that's not really ideal from a security standpoint (and I'd like to focus more on security than my old team did). Ideally, I'd get a decent desktop environment with a secondary monitor and a VirtualBox instance running Windows XP. The old arguments still hold true; our clients use Windows (so we need to test on IE 7/8) and our servers run Ubuntu (so it would help *a lot* if the development environment was the same).

Third, I need to get the basic development infrastructure up and running around here. Or, at least, the pieces that make sense. The focus should be on relieving pain, not inflicting it (I've seen firsthand the kind of damage that needless beaurocracy can cause). Small stuff; encouraging git use (and maybe some light-handed evangelism of Emacs and scheme), setting up a basic bug tracking database and maybe a build system for the running apps (that is, a one-click + confirm "put this build on live, please" button).

After that, we're in running mode. I figure I'll be playing the Product Manager part; keeping an eye on customers to see what it is they want, and where their pains are. I may or may not also champion some additions to the ease-of-use of the office. No water-cooler, if you'll believe that (though it really is kind of a waste; I'd say a water filter would be a good idea though), or toaster oven, or lunch area. If we start getting successful, we'll need to provide an attractive environment for prospective employees. 

Not many, mind you, I'm firmly of the Yegge school of thought that it's a good idea to keep your development group small and reflective instead of large and in constant motion. That seems counter-intuitive, but in practice, most of the motion tends to be duplication of effort, or porting to x (where x is the newest language/compiler/framework at the time). An added benefit is that if you keep your team small, then your codebase has to be manageable and maintainable by default; it can't sprawl and absorb new components on a daily basis, or it'll burn you bad.

In any case, my point is, we won't want *many* new employees at any given point, but we will want some. As it stands, I think we can use between two and four depending on their individual skill and expertise.
